Docs: clarify dir names for local plugins (#75157)
ansible/ansible: docs/docsite/rst/dev_guide/developing_locally.rst

=========================================

You can add modules and plugins by :ref:`creating a collection <developing_collections>`. With a collection, you can use custom modules and plugins in any playbook or role. You can share your collection easily at any time through Ansible Galaxy.

The rest of this page describes other methods of using local, standalone modules or plugins.

.. _local_modules:

Adding a module outside of a collection
=======================================

You can configure Ansible to load standalone local modules in a specified location or locations and make them available to all playbooks and roles. Alternatively, you can make a non-collection local module available only to specific playbooks or roles.

Adding standalone local modules for all playbooks and roles
-----------------------------------------------------------

To load standalone local modules automatically and make them available to all playbooks and roles, use the :ref:`DEFAULT_MODULE_PATH` configuration setting or the ``ANSIBLE_LIBRARY`` environment variable. The configuration setting and environment variable take a colon-separated list, similar to ``$PATH``. You have two options:

> * Add your standalone local module to one of the default configured locations. Read the documentation for the :ref:`DEFAULT_MODULE_PATH` configuration setting for details. Default locations may change without notice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add your standalone local module to one of the default configured locations. See the :ref:`DEFAULT_MODULE_PATH` configuration setting for details. Default locations may change without notice.
```

* type ``ansible-doc -t module my_local_module`` to see the documentation for that module

.. note::

   Currently, the ``ansible-doc`` command can parse module documentation only from modules written in Python. If you have a module written in a programming language other than Python, please write the documentation in a Python file adjacent to the module file.

Adding standalone local modules for selected playbooks or a single role
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Ansible automatically loads all executable files from certain directories adjacent to your playbook or role as modules. Standalone modules in these locations are available only to the specific playbook, playbooks, or role in the parent directory.

* To use a standalone module only in a selected playbook or playbooks, store the module in a subdirectory called ``library`` in the directory that contains the playbook or playbooks.
* To use a standalone module only in a single role, store the module in a subdirectory called ``library`` within that role. If you are developing new modules, we recommend distributing them in :ref:`collections <developing_collections>`, not in roles.

> 

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning here that for roles in a collection, you can no longer include a standalone module as part of that role?

Author: Ah, good catch, yes.

Author: addressed in d1103127ab512e487cd3dd6ec84baa420def0d3f

.. _distributing_plugins:
.. _local_plugins:

Adding a non-module plugin locally outside of a collection
==========================================================

You can configure Ansible to load standalone local plugins in a specified location or locations and make them available to all playbooks and roles. Alternatively, you can make a standalone local plugin available only to specific playbooks or roles.

.. note::

   Although modules are plugins, the naming patterns for directory names and environment variables that apply to other plugin types do not apply to modules. See :ref:`local_modules`.

Adding local non-module plugins for all playbooks and roles
-----------------------------------------------------------

To load standalone local plugins automatically and make them available to all playbooks and roles, use the configuration setting or environment variable for the type of plugin you are adding. These configuration settings and environment variables take a colon-separated list, similar to ``$PATH``. You have two options:

> * Add your local plugin to one of the default configured locations. Find the correct configuration setting for the plugin type in the documentation of :ref:`ansible_configuration_settings <configuration settings>` for details. Default locations may change without notice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add your local plugin to one of the default configured locations. Find the correct configuration setting for the plugin type in the documentation of :ref:`configuration settings <ansible_configuration_settings>` for details. Default locations may change without notice.
```

> * Add your local plugin to one of the default configured locations. Find the correct configuration setting for the plugin type in the documentation of :ref:`configuration settings <ansible_configuration_settings>` for details. Default locations may change without notice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add your local plugin to one of the default configured locations. See :ref:`configuration settings <ansible_configuration_settings>` for details on the correct configuration setting for the plugin type. Default locations may change without notice.
```

Adding modules and plugins locally
**********************************

> You can extend Ansible by adding custom modules or plugins. You can create them or copy existing ones for local use. You can store a local module or plugin on your Ansible control node and share it with your team or organization. You can also share plugins and modules by including them in a collection, then publishing the collection on Ansible Galaxy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can extend Ansible by adding custom modules or plugins. You can create them from scratch or copy existing ones for local use. You can store a local module or plugin on your Ansible control node and share it with your team or organization. You can also share plugins and modules by including them in a collection, then publishing the collection on Ansible Galaxy.
```

Adding modules and plugins locally
**********************************

> The easiest, quickest, and the most popular way to extend Ansible is to use a local module or a plugin. You can create them or copy existing ones for local use. You can store a local module or plugin on your Ansible control node and share it with your team or organization. You can also share a local plugin or module by including it in a collection, then publishing the collection on Ansible Galaxy. If you are using collections from Ansible Galaxy, then you are already using local modules and plugins without realizing it.

Reviewer 3: > If you are using collections from Ansible Galaxy, then you are already using local modules and plugins without realizing it.

I don't think this is correct; I think "local" refers to modules/plugins outside ansible-core and outside collections. (The previous version wasn't much better though, since roles from galaxy do not necessarily include modules/plugins.) (And I have no idea whether modules/plugins in local collections count as local modules/plugins...)

Author: addressed in c3790e3887d1eb3d7b3437f5ec4794233f1ff03d

> If you are using a legacy, standalone module or plugin but Ansible can't find it, this page is all you need.

Reviewer 2: The introductory paragraph says 

> The easiest, quickest, and the most popular way to extend Ansible is to use a local module or a plugin [...]

but here we're saying local plugins are legacy.   Perhaps we want to use less enthusiastic language in the introductory paragraph?  Or maybe we don't want to use legacy here (as collections serve a different niche than local plugins)?

Author: addressed in c3790e3887d1eb3d7b3437f5ec4794233f1ff03d

* To use a standalone module only in a single role, store the module in a subdirectory called ``library`` within that role.

.. _distributing_plugins:
.. _local_plugins:

Adding a plugin locally outside of a collection
===============================================

You can configure Ansible to load standalone local plugins in a specified location or locations and make them available to all playbooks and roles. Alternatively, you can make a standalone local plugin available only to specific playbooks or roles.

Adding local plugins for all playbooks and roles
-------------------------------------------------

To load standalone local plugins automatically and make them available to all playbooks and roles, use the configuration setting or environment variable for the type of plugin you are adding. These configuration settings and environment variables take colon-separated list, similar to ``$PATH``, and default to ``~/.ansible/plugins/<plugin_type>/:/usr/share/ansible/plugins/<plugin_type>/``. You have two options:

> 

Reviewer 4: I would point to the config variables instead of listing them as these paths can change

Author: addressed in 22e6bc666ecca573e9a5a86acd2ac64cec01a223

* Add your local plugin to one of the default configured locations:
   * the directory named for the correct ``plugin_type`` within ``~/.ansible/plugins/`` - for example, ``~/.ansible/plugins/callback/``

>    * the directory named for the correct ``plugin_type`` within ``/usr/share/ansible/plugins/`` - for example, ``/usr/share/ansible/plugins/action/``

Reviewer 4: same here, these directories are not guaranteed

Reviewer 4: I suggest pointing people at `ansbile-config dump |grep plugin_type_PATH` (not all use DEFAULT_, specifically become and doc fragment plugins)

Author: addressed in 22e6bc666ecca573e9a5a86acd2ac64cec01a223

Author: and also in c3790e3887d1eb3d7b3437f5ec4794233f1ff03d

* type ``ansible-doc -t <plugin_type> my_local_lookup_plugin`` to see the documentation for that plugin - for example, ``ansible-doc -t lookup my_local_lookup_plugin``

The ``ansible-doc`` command works for most plugin types, but not for action, filter, or test plugins. See :ref:`ansible-doc` for more details.

Adding standalone local plugins for selected playbooks or a single role
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Ansible automatically loads all plugins from certain directories adjacent to your playbook or role, loading each type of plugin separately from a directory named for the type of plugin. Standalone plugins in these locations are available only to the specific playbook, playbooks, or role in the parent directory.

* To use a standalone plugin only in a selected playbook or playbooks, store the plugin in a subdirectory for the correct ``plugin_type`` (for example, ``callback_plugins`` or ``inventory_plugins``) in the directory that contains the playbooks. These directories must use the `_plugins` suffix. For a full list of plugin types, see :ref:`working_with_plugins`.

> * To use a standalone plugin only in a single role, store the plugin in a subdirectory for the correct ``plugin_type`` (for example, ``cache_plugins`` or ``strategy_plugins``) within that role. When shipped as part of a role, the plugin is available as soon as the role is executed. These directories must use the `_plugins` suffix. For a full list of plugin types, see :ref:`working_with_plugins`.

Reviewer 4: worth noting that 'library/' and modules are an exception to the pattern

Author: well, we do have a whole section on modules . . . but I will add a note here with a reference to the section above

Author: addressed in 1bf8119153f576b901f4771b334d0c31e3478326

Thanks @bcoca.

Modules and plugins: what is the difference?
============================================
If you are looking to add local functionality to Ansible, you might wonder whether you need a module or a plugin. Here is a quick overview to help you understand what you need:

* Modules are reusable, standalone scripts that can be used by the Ansible API, the :command:`ansible` command, or the :command:`ansible-playbook` command. Modules provide a defined interface. Each module accepts arguments and returns information to Ansible by printing a JSON string to stdout before exiting. Modules execute on the target system (usually that means on a remote system) in separate processes. Modules are technically plugins, but for historical reasons we do not usually talk about "module plugins".
* :ref:`Plugins <working_with_plugins>` augment Ansible's core functionality and execute on the control node within the ``/usr/bin/ansible`` process. Plugins offer options and extensions for the core features of Ansible - transforming data, logging output, connecting to inventory, and more.

.. _use_collections:

Adding modules and plugins in collections
=========================================

> The best way to add local modules and plugins is to :ref:`create a collection <developing_collections>`. With a collection, you can use custom modules and plugins in any playbook or role. You can share your collection easily at any time through Ansible Galaxy.

Reviewer 3: I think `local` shouldn't be here (for the above reasons):
```suggestion
The best way to add modules and plugins is to :ref:`create a collection <developing_collections>`. With a collection, you can use custom modules and plugins in any playbook or role. You can share your collection easily at any time through Ansible Galaxy.
```

Author: addressed in c3790e3887d1eb3d7b3437f5ec4794233f1ff03d
